Some developing stories…
Case count: There are over 5.2 million confirmed cases in the U.S. and over 20 million confirmed cases worldwide. So far over 166,100 Americans have died from Covid-19. There are surely more.
Senate leaves until September without coronavirus relief deal: The Senate left Washington, D.C., on Thursday until September with talks over a fifth coronavirus relief package at a stalemate.
The U.S. has already passed 200,000 deaths: The New York Times reports that the truth death toll of the pandemic is 60,000 higher than the number of deaths that have been directly linked to the coronavirus. This is due to unusual patterns in deaths from all causes across the U.S.
New unemployment claims fell below one million for the first time since March: Last week, 963,000 workers filed first-time jobless claims, which marks the first time in 21 weeks that these claims feel below the million mark. An odd milestone.
HHS management of Covid-19 data is not going well: The Department of Health and Human Services took control of Covid-19 case tracking and public release of data has significantly slowed and has quality control issues. Read more.
Sign up for the newsletter to get the key coronavirus stories of the day delivered straight to you
Have a Covid-19 question? Check out our Q&A page.
347

8



Emily Mullin
·20 hours ago
How — and When — We’ll Know If a Covid-19 Vaccine Is Working
Phase 3 trials explained
Image for post
Photo: ANDREW CABALLERO-REYNOLDS / Getty Images
There are more than 150 experimental Covid-19 vaccines in development right now, and a handful of those have recently entered the final stages of human testing.
Initial findings show a glimmer of promise: In early trials, these vaccines appear safe and seem to spur an immune response in the body. But how will we know that a vaccine is actually working? And how soon could that be?
Despite President Trump’s rosy predictions that a vaccine will be ready by Election Day on November 3, experts say that timeline is unlikely.
“I don’t see how that’s possible,” said Paul Offit, MD, director of the Vaccine Education Center at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, during a National Press Foundation briefing for journalists on August 10. “I think that would be a mistake. You want to make sure that we have clear efficacy data before we put this vaccine out there, because there is…
Read more · 6 min read
25




Coronavirus Blog Team
·22 hours ago

A message from the former director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
66

1



Alexandra Sifferlin
·1 day ago
Most Americans Say They Will Get a Covid-19 Vaccine
What the data really shows
A tray with a bandaid and shot.
Photo: Heather Hazzan/SELF Magazine
Cases of Covid-19 passed 20 million this week and over 164,500 people have died from the infection in the United States. The mad rush to develop, test, and distribute a vaccine is ongoing and high stakes. While there’s no approved vaccine for American use (Russia says it has approved a vaccine, but scientists are skeptical of its safety and effectiveness), there are already questions about whether enough people will get the vaccine to gain population-wide protection. The concerns are valid, but while many headlines have lamented the number of Americans who say they won’t get vaccinated, a closer look at the data reveals a more encouraging story.
Vaccine hesitancy in the United States is higher than it has been in the past, and in some cases, it’s resulted in the spread of preventable diseases like the measles. Productively engaging with people who are hesitant about getting vaccines or vaccinating their…
Read more · 3 min read
120

3



Andy Slavitt
·1 day ago
Several Politicians Are Making It Clear They’re Not Fit for the Job
When there’s a global pandemic and so many aren’t up for the job, I propose letting these leaders out of their jobs
Image for post
Credit: Patcharanan Worrapatchareeroj / Getty Images
May, June, and July were months spent training Southern governors on things they should have learned from April from New York. Confident and ignorant are a bad combination.
The governor of Texas at first didn’t think masks were needed. He was sure businesses could open. Wouldn’t take input. Then he learned on the job. It took a while so Abbott started to pull back a bit. Things flattened out a little.
But he stopped enforcing mask orders. Ignored the border. Bragged about how well businesses are doing. Now, Texas has over 500,000 cases, 1,400 deaths this week, and almost 10,000 overall, high positive tests, high hospitalizations. Limited access to tests.
Yet he’s gung ho to open the schools. Why? Because he’s studied the data.
Oh I make myself laugh. Ah, no. Because he’s literal. And he hasn’t seen a problem in schools yet. Georgia school districts that opened under order…
Read more · 4 min read
460

4



Coronavirus Blog Team
·1 day ago
Fact-Checking President Trump’s ‘Historic Coronavirus Response’ Brief
OMG
Image for post
Credit: Alex Wong / Staff / Getty Images
The White House released a brief on Monday titled “President Trump’s Historic Coronavirus Response Brief,” which outlines the supposed ways the president has successfully combated the novel coronavirus. The United States’ response to Covid-19 is globally considered an ongoing failure, however, and the brief contains several inaccuracies or exaggerations. The U.S. is currently leading the world in the number of people who have been killed by the virus at over 165,300 at publication time. We’ve fact-checked the “key takeaways” from the White House brief below.
KEY TAKEAWAYS:
“Took early action to cut off travel from China”
The U.S. was neither ahead or after the curve in restricting travel from China. The World Health Organization declared the coronavirus outbreak a public health emergency of international concern on January 30. The same day, the State Department raised its travel advisory for China to “Level 4 — Do Not Travel.” In doing so, the U.S. was acting in accordance with many other countries. According…
Read more · 8 min read
224

5



Coronavirus Blog Team
·2 days ago
Advocacy for the Covid-19 Vaccine Should Start Now
While most Americans say they want to get the Covid-19 vaccine (once it is safely tested and approved for use), there is significant vaccine hesitancy in the United States. There’s also the fact that medical conspiracists are already spreading misinformation to millions of people who will listen. That’s why, as Kelly Osgood reports, experts say advocacy efforts for the Covid-19 vaccine need to start right now. And science communicators can learn from the work of activists in the childhood vaccine space. Read more below.
What to Do Now to Make Sure People Get the Vaccine When It’s Ready
Experts should take note of the successes of childhood vaccination advocates
elemental.medium.com
55




Coronavirus Blog Team
·2 days ago
Is It Safe to Go to a Pool During the Pandemic?
There’s no evidence the coronavirus that causes Covid-19 spreads in the water. But that doesn’t mean crowded pools are stress-free. Here are some tips to keep in mind (including skipping the post-swim shower).
Read This Before You Go to a Swimming Pool
Experts say there’s no evidence that the coronavirus is spread through the water, but that doesn’t mean a pool day is…
elemental.medium.com
And here are a couple more tips for pandemic living.
Read This Before You Go to the Dentist
Dental practices are high-risk during the pandemic. Here’s what to know before making an appointment.
elemental.medium.com
Read This Before You Stay In a Hotel
Hotel stays may not be the best move, but if you must, here’s how to do it safely
elemental.medium.com




Yasmin Tayag
·2 days ago
New Zealand’s Rapid Response to New Cases Is What Pandemic Leadership Looks Like
Auckland is under strict restrictions after four new cases of Covid-19 popped up
Image for post
Credit: Hagen Hopkins / Stringer / Getty Images
On Tuesday, New Zealand confirmed four new coronavirus cases — its first since May 1. That means there were 102 days during which there was no community spread of Covid-19 in the island nation. Within the same period of time, the United States reached record high numbers of new cases. Today the U.S. recorded 48,690.
It’s obvious from the rapid way New Zealand responded to the new cases how the country managed to keep its numbers so low for so long. The night the cases were confirmed, Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern announced in a public address that the city of Auckland, where the new cases were discovered, would be put under Level 3 restrictions on Wednesday. The rest of the country would move to Level 2 lockdown.
In March, New Zealand established a four-level “alert system” of restriction measures to stop the spread of the coronavirus, with Level 4 consisting…
Read more · 4 min read
